What's the next challenge we'll discuss?
It's a disagreement between elders.
If you're an elder, have you experienced that?
Were voices raised?
Did tempers flare?
Has a friendship with a fellow elder cooled off?
Though we rightly expect appointed brothers to be exemplary, the fact is all of us, including
elders, are still imperfect.
This is in backgrounds, personalities, experience, and opinions can lead to disagreements.
And a disagreement, if not resolved, can disrupt our peace and that of others.
In this talk, we'll consider how two elders in the first century, Paul and Barnabas,
sowed and reaped peace.
Let's see how their example can help appointed men today, including all of you dear elders,
to resolve a disagreement.
Please open your Bible with me to Acts chapter 15 and read together, verses 36 to 39.
In the reading, please note the problem that arose between Paul and Barnabas.
That's Acts chapter 15 beginning at verse 36.
After some days Paul said to Barnabas, let us now return and visit the brothers in
every one of the cities where we proclaim the word of Jehovah to see how they are.
This was determined to take along John, who was called Mark.
Paul, however, was not in favor of taking him along with them, seeing that he had departed
from them in Pamphilia and had not gone with them to the work.
At this there was a sharp burst of anger so that they separated from each other, and
Barnabas took Mark along and sailed away to Cyprus.
What was the problem?
These two elders strongly disagreed about whether to take Mark with them on their next missionary
tour.
Of course, expressing a difference of opinion as not always wrong, verse 7 of this same
chapter reports that the apostles and older men in Jerusalem had an intense discussion
that led to a good outcome.
But in this case, what resulted?
Please look again at verse 39.
It would be nice to read at this Paul and Barnabas prayed to Jehovah and came to an
agreement.
Sadly though, their discussion on this occasion led to a sharp burst of anger and they separated.
As a result, their friendship was affected by a temporary strain.
Why do we say temporary?
It appears that Paul and Barnabas put this matter behind them.
A short time later in Paul's letter to the Galatians, he wrote about Barnabas and the
activity they had enjoyed together and Paul did not bring up their dispute.
Also, when Paul later wrote to the Colossians and then to Timothy, Paul spoke well of Mark.
In fact, in Paul's last inspired letter, the second to Timothy, he wrote this, bring
Mark along with you, for he is helpful to me in the ministry.
Yes, it seems that Paul and Barnabas resolved their disagreement.
Now, let's think about that, brothers.
What made that possible?
It's this.
Long before their disagreement, they had shared together in an exciting ministry.
For years, they were united in what the Bible calls a bond of peace.
So even though their friendship experienced strain, the bond between them was strong, strong
enough to withstand the stress.
Well, let's bring this to our day.
In the following dramatization, please notice how an elder so's peace.
You know, there's more to the story?
Phil didn't know just how tense things were between Tim and I.
No idea.
We never talked.
I mean, really talked about it until it was too late.
Look, we need to talk.
I think we need to seriously reconsider Phil's qualifications.
You know he's not the type of brother that we have.
Enough.
Enough about Phil.
I know he's your friend.
But the body agreed that friends, he's worked with us for years.
The body decided unanimously that he should know all of us.
You pushed them.
Excuse me.
It's enough that we have those outside the congregation putting pressure on us.
We do not need more in here.
Seriously?
The conversation, the argument, it was terrible.
We both said things we didn't mean.
And after that, we both handled the situation poorly.
We needed to make things right.
It wasn't easy, but we talked it out.
And we made peace with Jehovah's help.
Can you imagine what it would have been like in that cell block if we hadn't?
We finally told Phil the whole story once we were all roommates.
Wow.
Let's go sing.
Elders, here's the question before all of us now.
How can we imitate Paul and Barnabas first?
As elders, we must apply scriptural counsel and our dealings with one another.
In the video, we just saw how imperfection got the better of Tim and Carl.
Their body language, choice of words, tone of voice, as Tim put it, the argument was terrible.
But after the dispute, what did those two elders eventually do right?
They applied scriptural counsel and made peace.
For example, the divine counsel at James chapter 3 and verse 17 reminds all of us to be
peaceable and reasonable.
The watchtower once suggested how this could be applied to elders, I quote,
peacemakers modestly express their thoughts and then respectfully listen to those of others.
Instead of insisting on his own way, a peacemaker will prayerfully consider his brother's viewpoint.
If no Bible principle is violated, there is usually room for varied points of view.
Experienced overseers know that preserving the peace is more important than getting one's
own way.
What a beautiful thought.
So what's our first lesson?
If we as elders apply scriptural counsel in our dealings with one another, we'll never
allow a difference of opinion to become a cause for animosity.
Romans chapter 12 and verse 10 outlines a second lesson.
Please open your Bible with me there.
Under inspiration at Romans chapter 12 and verse 10, Paul wrote this,
In brotherly love have tender affection for one another, in showing honor to one another
take the lead.
Brothers, elders now, before life gets even more difficult, this is what we need to do.
We need to strengthen love and affection for one another.
We can do that by continuing to speak well of our fellow elders in public and in private.
By resisting the urge to talk negatively to other elders about any disagreements that
arise, and by regularly reflecting on our brothers good qualities and on our past
service together.
In the video, weren't we happy to see how Tim and Carl imitated Paul and Barnabas
and eventually reaped peace?
Though not easy, they applied scriptural counsel and resolved their problem.
That warm smile on Carl's face, when he showed up at Tim's home, the dessert, perhaps
Tim's favorite pie, the heart to heart talk, and their lasting friendship, even in prison,
shows that they maintained their love and affection for each other.
Dear brothers, elders, may we do likewise.
Let's settle disagreements quickly and peacefully.
When we do so, we'll reap not only peace, but we'll prove to be examples to the flock
just like Paul and Barnabas.
Brother Stephen let a member of the governing body will now consider the final talk of this
symposium, how they sowed and reaped peace, modern day examples.